
Day 39 – Polymorphism (Complete Summary)

Polymorphism

Polymorphism means "Many Forms."

The same method can perform different actions depending on how it is used.

There are two types of polymorphism:

1. Compile-Time Polymorphism (Method Overloading)


2. Run-Time Polymorphism (Method Overriding)




---

1. Compile-Time Polymorphism (Method Overloading)

Method overloading means having multiple methods with the same name in the same class, but with different parameter lists.

Real-Time Example – TV Remote

Suppose your TV remote has a Volume button.

Sometimes you increase the volume by 1:

increaseVolume();

Sometimes you want to increase it by 5:

increaseVolume(5);

The operation is the same (increase volume), but the way you call it is different. This is method overloading.


---

Rules for Method Overloading

A class can have methods with the same name if they differ by:

✅ Different number of parameters.

✅ Different data types of parameters.

✅ Different order of parameter data types.


Example:

class Calculator {

    void add(int a, int b) { }

    void add(int a, int b, int c) { }

    void add(double a, double b) { }

    void add(int a, double b) { }

    void add(double a, int b) { }
}

Return Type

✅ You can have different return types only if the parameter list is also different.

Features of Method Overloading

Same class.

Same method name.

Different parameter list.

No inheritance required.

Decided at compile time.



---

2. Run-Time Polymorphism (Method Overriding)

Method overriding means the child class provides its own implementation of a method already present in the parent class.

It is used when we want to change the implementation of a parent class method in the child class.


---

Real-Time Example – Grandfather's Land

Imagine:

Grandfather has 10 acres of land.

He uses 1 acre for farming and sells the remaining 9 acres.

Father inherits that 1 acre and uses it as a shed.

Child inherits the same land but uses half an acre for a business and half an acre for a house.


The property is the same, but each generation uses it differently.

Similarly, in Java:

The parent class provides a method.

The child class changes its implementation according to its own requirement.


This is called method overriding.


---

Rules for Method Overriding

✅ Inheritance is required.

✅ Same method name.

✅ Same parameter list.

✅ Same return type (or a covariant return type).

✅ Child class provides a different implementation.


Example:

class Animal {

    void sound() {
        System.out.println("Animal Sound");
    }
}

class Dog extends Animal {

    @Override
    void sound() {
        System.out.println("Dog Barks");
    }
}


---

Can Static Methods Be Overridden?

❌ No.

Static methods belong to the class, not to an object.

They are resolved at compile time, so they cannot be overridden.

Instead, they are hidden.


---

Method Hiding

Method hiding occurs when a child class declares a static method with the same signature as a static method in the parent class.

Example:

class Parent {

    static void display() {
        System.out.println("Parent");
    }
}

class Child extends Parent {

    static void display() {
        System.out.println("Child");
    }
}

Here:

Child.display() hides Parent.display().

This is method hiding, not overriding.



---

Method Overloading vs Method Overriding

Method Overloading	Method Overriding

Same class	Parent and child classes
Inheritance not required	Inheritance required
Same method name	Same method name
Different parameter list	Same parameter list
Return type can differ only if parameters differ	Same (or covariant) return type
Compile-time polymorphism	Runtime polymorphism



---

Method Overriding vs Method Hiding

Method Overriding	Method Hiding

Instance methods	Static methods
Runtime polymorphism	Compile-time binding
Uses object type	Uses reference/class type
Child method overrides parent method	Child static method hides parent static method



---

Quick Revision

✅ Polymorphism = Many Forms.

✅ Types:

Compile-Time Polymorphism

Run-Time Polymorphism


✅ Method Overloading:

Same class.

Same method name.

Different parameter list.

TV remote example (increase volume by 1 or by a specific number).


✅ Return type may differ only if the parameter list is also different.

❌ Changing only the return type is not overloading.

✅ Method Overriding:

Requires inheritance.

Same method name.

Same parameter list.

Same (or covariant) return type.

Child class changes the parent's implementation.


✅ Grandfather → Father → Child land usage is a good analogy for changing the implementation while inheriting the same method.

❌ Static methods cannot be overridden.

✅ Static methods are hidden (method hiding).


Easy Memory Trick

Overloading → Same Class + Different Parameters + Compile Time

Overriding → Inheritance + Same Signature + Runtime

Method Hiding → Static Methods + Compile Time
