Day 36– Variables in Java (Static Variables & Local Variables)

1. Static Variables (Class Variables)

A static variable is declared inside a class, outside all methods, and uses the static keyword.

Example

class Student {
    static String college = "ABC College";
}

Features

Declared inside the class but outside methods.

Declared using the static keyword.

Stored in the Method Area (Class Area) of JVM memory.

Shared by all objects of the class.

Memory is allocated when the class is loaded.

Gets default values automatically.

It is recommended to access a static variable using the class name.


Example:

System.out.println(Student.college);

Shared Nature

If one object changes a static variable:

Student s1 = new Student();
Student s2 = new Student();

s1.college = "XYZ College";

Then:

System.out.println(s2.college);

Output:

XYZ College

This is because there is only one copy of the static variable, shared by all objects.


---

2. Local Variables

A local variable is declared inside a method, constructor, or block.

Example

void display() {
    int marks = 90;
}

Here, marks is a local variable.

Features

Declared inside methods, constructors, or blocks.

Stored in the Stack Memory.

Memory is allocated when the method is called.

Destroyed when the method execution finishes.

No default values are assigned.

Must be initialized before use.

Scope is limited to the method/block where it is declared.


Example:

void display() {
    int a;
    System.out.println(a);   // Compile-time error
}

This gives an error because local variables must be initialized before use.

Correct:

void display() {
    int a = 10;
    System.out.println(a);
}


---

Difference Between Static Variables and Local Variables

Static Variable	Local Variable

Inside class, outside methods	Inside methods, constructors, or blocks
Uses static keyword	No static keyword
Stored in Method Area	Stored in Stack
Memory allocated when class loads	Memory allocated when method is called
Shared by all objects	Belongs only to the current method
Has default values	No default values
Accessible using class name	Accessible only within the method



---

Quick Revision

✅ Static variable = Inside class + outside methods + static keyword.

✅ Stored in Method Area.

✅ Shared by all objects.

✅ Memory allocated when the class is loaded.

✅ Has default values.

✅ Access using ClassName.variableName.

✅ Local variable = Declared inside a method/constructor/block.

✅ Stored in Stack Memory.

✅ Memory allocated when the method is called.

✅ No default values.

✅ Must be initialized before use.

✅ Scope is limited to the method or block in which it is declared.


This is a clean Day 36 summary for your Java notes.
